
        Wrecking Crew level editor v1.0
        by SnowBro <kentmhan@online.no>


        About
        -----

        This editor works pretty much exactly like the built-in
        level editor in Wrecking Crew. Why did I bother to make
        an editor for a game which already has one, you say?
        Well, the built-in editor in Wrecking Crew had some
        annoying problems:

        - You couldn't edit the original game levels (1-100)
        - The "Save" and "Load" functions were totally bogus!

        Also, those of you who played with the built-in editor
        probably remember another "bug": there has to be a
        breakable wall in your level, otherwise the game will
        just skip to the next level. CrewEdit can't fix this
        last problem (since it has to do with the game engine
        itself), so keep it in mind when you're designing
        levels.

        One of the things I remember about Wrecking Crew
        (from my early NES days) was that it had very crappy
        level design. While some of the early levels were
        kinda neat, most of the latter ones were either
        ridiculously hard, or just plain ugly. I'm sure that
        someone can do better than most of the levels presented
        in the game (check out level 89, for example! :P ).
        The people who made the game probably got very bored
        with it after designing about 20 levels, so they
        just slammed blindly on their keyboards to produce
        the final 80. Well, now's your chance to change this!
        Good luck on your quest to make Wrecking Crew a
        memorable game - you'll need it. ;-)


        Keys
        ----

        Keys "1" and "2": These work like the "A" and "B"
        buttons in the in-game editor. First press will
        select the current object at the current map
        position. Subsequent presses will flip through
        the objects you can select from.

        Arrow keys select map position.

        F1 selects the previous level.

        F2 selects the next level.

        F5 saves changes.

        F10 clears current level.
